[expo-type-information] add tutorial and reference for type generation to docs, update CLI manual and JSDocs (#45682)
expo/expo: docs/pages/modules/type-generation-reference.mdx

---
title: Type generation reference
description: A reference for the expo-type-information package.
packageName: 'expo-type-information'
---

import APISection from '~/components/plugins/APISection';
import { Terminal } from '~/ui/components/Snippet';

> > **warning** The `expo-type-information` package works only on macOS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **warning** The `expo-type-information` library works only on macOS. Available for SDK 56 and later.
```

- Should we also add info here about which SDK version it is available from?
- Also, for SDK packages, we prefer "libraries" as per: https://github.com/expo/expo/blob/main/guides/Expo%20Documentation%20Writing%20Style%20Guide.md#glossary

The `expo-type-information` package provides tools to automatically generate TypeScript interface for Swift modules. It consists of multiple parts:

- Swift parser based on `sourcekitten` -- a parser that can retrieve and structure the type information from a Swift Expo module.
- Type Abstraction -- an abstraction over type information relevant for Expo modules, the parser returns the information in this abstracted way.
- TypeScript AST Emitter -- a set of functions which help with generating TypeScript code.

> - CLI tool -- a CLI which integrates the above functionalities

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Swift parser based on `sourcekitten`: a parser that can retrieve and structure the type information from a Swift Expo module.
- Type Abstraction: an abstraction over type information relevant for Expo modules, the parser returns the information in this abstracted way.
- TypeScript AST Emitter: a set of functions which help with generating TypeScript code.
- CLI: a command-line tool, which integrates the above functionalities.
```

Let's use `:` and avoid using obsolete `--` pattern. Also, in the last item, let's update for improved readability. Before it said CLI twice without stating what CLI is.

## Configuration

> First install the `expo-type-information` package.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Install the `expo-type-information` library:
```

> <Terminal cmd={['$ npm install expo-type-information']} />

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Terminal cmd={['$ npx expo install expo-type-information']} />
```

I am not sure if this package follows the standard Expo SDK versioning but if it does, I think we should use `npx expo install`.

> To use this package you also need to have sourcekitten installed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use this package you also need to have `sourcekitten` installed. You can use macOS package manager like Homebrew.
```

Let's be explicit about using a package manager on macOS here for clarity.

<Terminal cmd={['$ brew install sourcekitten']} />

## CLI reference

### Common CLI options

> Every CLI command in this package uses these common options for configuration. The only exception is the `inline-modules-interface` which has slightly different options.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every CLI command in this library uses the following common options for configuration. The only exception is the `inline-modules-interface` which has slightly different options.
```

| `-i, --input-paths <filePaths...>`     | Paths to Swift files for some module, glob patterns are allowed.                                                                                                                                                                                           |                    |
| `-m --module-path <modulePath>`        | Path to Expo module root directory.                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |                    |
| `-o, --output-path <filePath>`         | Path to save the generated output. If this option is not provided the generated output is printed to console.                                                                                                                                              |                    |

> | `-t, --type-inference <typeInference>` | Level of type inference: NO_INFERENCE, SIMPLE_INFERENCE, or PREPROCESS_AND_INFERENCE. Note that the `PREPROCESS_AND_INFERENCE` option can occasionally fail on some modules. If you encountered errors, fall back to `SIMPLE_INFERENCE` or `NO_INFERENCE`. | `SIMPLE_INFERENCE` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `-t, --type-inference <typeInference>` | Level of type inference: `NO_INFERENCE, SIMPLE_INFERENCE`, or `PREPROCESS_AND_INFERENCE`. Note that the `PREPROCESS_AND_INFERENCE` option can occasionally fail on some modules. If you encountered errors, fall back to `SIMPLE_INFERENCE` or `NO_INFERENCE`. | `SIMPLE_INFERENCE` |
```

| `-w --watcher`                         | Starts a watcher that checks for changes in input-path file.                                                                                                                                                                                               |                    |

### Main commands

#### `module-interface`

> Generates a full ts interface for a Swift module. It consists of types.ts file with all types defined in the module, module.ts with the native module definition, and view.tsx for each view defined in the module, and an index.ts file which reexports some functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Generates a full TypeScript interface for a Swift module. It consists of:

- **types.ts** file with all types defined in the module
- **module.ts** with the native module definition
- **view.tsx** for each view defined in the module
- **index.ts** file which reexports some functions
```

For file names, we use bold text format: https://github.com/expo/expo/blob/main/guides/Expo%20Documentation%20Writing%20Style%20Guide.md#file-names-directory-names-file-extensions-as-bold-text

Let's also break it down into an item of list for easier readability.

> Accepts standard [Common CLI options](#common-cli-options).

#### `inline-modules-interface`

> Creates ts interface for every Swift inline module in the project. The ts interface consists of two files Module.generated.ts and Module.tsx, the first one is regenerated with each run of the command and the second one will not be regenerated if user changes it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Creates a TypeScript interface for every Swift inline module in the project. The interface consists of two files:
- **Module.generated.ts**: This is regenerated with each run of the command 
- **Module.tsx**: This one is not regenerated if you change it
```

**Options:**
| Flag | Description | Default |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |

> | `-a --app-json <appJsonPath>` | A path to the `app.json` where the inline.modules.watchedDirectories are defined. | |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `-a --app-json <appJsonPath>` | A path to the [app config](/workflow/configuration/) file where the `inline.modules.watchedDirectories` are defined. | |
```

Missing inline syntax highlight and this is how we refer app config files: https://github.com/expo/expo/blob/main/guides/Expo%20Documentation%20Writing%20Style%20Guide.md#referencing-appjsonappconfigjsonappconfigjsappconfigts.

| `-w --watcher` | Starts a watcher that checks for changes in inline modules files. | |

> | `-t, --type-inference <typeInference>` | Level of type inference: NO_INFERENCE, SIMPLE_INFERENCE, or PREPROCESS_AND_INFERENCE. Note that the `PREPROCESS_AND_INFERENCE` option can occasionally fail on some modules. If you encountered errors, fall back to `SIMPLE_INFERENCE` or `NO_INFERENCE`. | `SIMPLE_INFERENCE` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `-t, --type-inference <typeInference>` | Level of type inference: `NO_INFERENCE, SIMPLE_INFERENCE`, or `PREPROCESS_AND_INFERENCE`. Note that the `PREPROCESS_AND_INFERENCE` option can occasionally fail on some modules. If you encountered errors, fall back to `SIMPLE_INFERENCE` or `NO_INFERENCE`. | `SIMPLE_INFERENCE` |
```

---

#### `short-module-interface`

> Creates a short ts interface for an Expo module. Overwrites `ModuleName.generated.ts` and creates `ModuleName.ts` if not present. Can be used with inline-modules.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Creates a short TypeScript interface for an Expo module. Overwrites **ModuleName.generated.ts** and creates **ModuleName.ts** if not present. Can be used with inline-modules.
```

> Accepts standard [Common CLI options](#common-cli-options).

#### `generate-mocks-for-file`

Generates mocks for a given expo module.

> Accepts standard [Common CLI options](#common-cli-options).

### Other commands

These commands are internal or very specific.

> All commands in this section accept the standard [Common CLI options](#common-cli-options).

#### `other type-information`

> Parses Swift module type information and outputs a FileTypeInformation JSON.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Parses Swift module type information and outputs a `FileTypeInformation` JSON.
```

#### `other generate-module-types`

Generates a type declaration file content for a module.

#### `other generate-view-types`

Generates a type declaration file for a native View.

#### `other generate-jsx-intrinsics`

Generates a declaration file for a View, updates JSX intrinsics with the View props.

<APISection
  forceVersion="unversioned"
  packageName="expo-type-information"
  headersMapping={{
    TypeInformationAbstraction: 'Type information abstraction',
    TypescriptGeneration: 'TypeScript generation',
    TypeInfoTypes: 'Type Information Types',
    Mocks: 'Mock generation',
  }}
/>

## Swift parser limitations

> This package uses `sourcekitten` to parse the Swift file. Parsing a Swift file is a complex task and not everything is now implemented.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`expo-type-information`` library uses `sourcekitten` to parse the Swift file. Parsing a Swift file is a complex task and not everything is now implemented.
```

> Known issues about the current version of parsing the Swift file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Known issues about the current version of parsing the Swift file:
```

Can we use `Collapsible` component this "known issues" and its content?

Author: Done

- Nested classes will not be resolved fully.

  `Sourcekitten` has a limit on resolving nested closures, so classes defined in your module may not be fully resolved. This is the reason why if there is a DSL `Class` in a module, its methods will have their return types `unresolved`.

- Return type resolution, `PREPROCESS_AND_INFERENCE` inference option.

>   When the return type of a closure is not provided explicitly, the tool needs to infer it. One of the ways of doing it in `sourcekitten` is when there is a `return identifier` statement we can ask about the type of the `identifier`. The 3rd inference option `PREPROCESS_AND_INFERENCE` rewrites the file such that for each `return expression` statement a new `let return_expression = expression; return return_expression;` is inserted so that we can ask about the identifier type. Rewriting is known to sometimes have issues (mostly because of strings and comments) so it may not always work. There is also currently no way to resolve a `return`-less return i.e. when the return expression is just the tail expression of the closure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  When the return type of a closure is not provided explicitly, the tool needs to infer it. One of the ways of doing it in `sourcekitten` is when there is a `return identifier` statement we can ask about the type of the `identifier`. The third inference option, `PREPROCESS_AND_INFERENCE`, rewrites the file such that for each `return expression` statement a new `let return_expression = expression; return return_expression;` is inserted so that we can ask about the identifier type. Rewriting is known to sometimes have issues (mostly because of strings and comments) so it may not always work. There is also currently no way to resolve a `return`-less return, when the return expression is a tail expression of the closure.
```

- Unsupported Expo Module DSL declarations.

  Not all of the DSL declarations are parsed right now, and some are not parsed in every context. For example `Events` are parsed inside a `View` but not in a Module definition.

- Using Unicode characters breaks `sourcekitten` offsets.

### List of supported Expo modules DSL declarations

We currently support parsing following DSL declarations:

- `AsyncFunction`
- `Constant`
- `Constructor`
- `Events`
- `Function`
- `Name`
- `Prop`
- `Property`
- `View`

We also support parsing following Swift constructs:

> - `struct` and `class` which inherit from `Record`

Reviewer: Let's use a table here.

Author: Added a table for all supported features

>   Only fields with @Field annotation are parsed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Only fields with `@Field` annotation are parsed
```
